# Exploration of Danish humanitarian NGO's during Covid-19 

*By Nadia Schouw, Victoria Hjørtoft and Sofie Andersen*

Exam numbers in Digital Methods: 13, 24, and 29

Exam numbers in ASDS II: 6, 12, and 18


**Characters in total: 47,992** 

# 1 Introduction (29,24,13)
Humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) handle aid, communicate about crises and provide support for vulnerable people, criticizing injustice and fighting for social and humanitarian sustainability. The NGOs are playing an important role in society affecting political agendas and setting the public debate (Schäfer 2012). In a time of crisis, where the Covid-19 pandemic rages and more people are distressed, the NGOs are facing new emergencies embedded in all previous existing ones. Consequently, the NGOs must fight for their agendas, while also being financially challenged due to fewer lucrative activities and more people in need of help. This fight has partially taken place on social media, as these platforms play an increasingly important role in political communication including both agenda setting, decision making and public dialogue (Yang et al. 2016). In the context of these new challenges, we will in this paper map the public debate of the Danish humanitarian NGOs across social media platforms during Covid-19 to understand how the NGOs communicate and interrelate under these circumstances by making an empirical quanti-qualitative in-depth analysis.

# 2 Research question (29, 24, 13)
What dominate the Danish humanitarian NGOs’ focuses in their communication on social media platforms during the Covid-19 pandemic and how do the NGOs interrelate on social media during this time?

## 2.1 Problem statements (29, 24, 13)

**Digital methods**
* What is prominent in the Danish humanitarian NGOs communication across different social media platforms and how are the NGOs thematically clustered in relation to each other?
* Based on different types of network analysis, what is the interrelations between Danish humanitarian NGOs on different social media platforms?
**ASDS II**
* Which topics are present in the communication of the Danish humanitarian NGOs during Covid-19 on Twitter?
* What classifies the Danish humanitarian NGOs’ communication on Twitter during Covid-19?


The problem statements will be used throughout the paper to investigate the overall research question. Notably, the questions will not be answered in chronological order, but will serve as an overall framework.

# 3 State of the art (29)
NGOs are characterized by their work and focus on a wide range of areas including health, education, human rights and corporate social responsibility (Amstrong & Butcher 2017; Ryfman 2007). NGOs act as mediators between scientific expertise and the public and rely heavily on strategic communication by news coverage and public attention to accomplish their goals (Ladle et al. 2005; Schäfer 2012). Past research has focused on the area of climate change, environmental communication and framing, by exploring how the NGOs use social media and interrelate with each other, as well as mobilize support in time of crises (Takahashi et al. 2015; Allan & Hadden 2017; Vu et al. 2020; Lück et al. 2018).

Further, in the context of Covid-19, Blok et al. (2020) have demonstrated similarities and differences in how Scandinavian, climate-active environmental or green NGOs engage in framing their work during the initial phase of the coronavirus pandemic. Their research shows a gap investigating Covid-19 in relation to human rights and how the humanitarian NGOs frame their communication in time of a worldwide crisis. This perspective has not yet been investigated in a Danish context, amongst others.

We define humanitarian aid and development as being built on the principles of humanity, neutrality, and impartiality, with the objective of providing aid and assistance to people in need, enabling people to lead long, healthy, educated and fulfilling lives. Hence, creating positive social impact and long-term effectiveness of developing aid (Neumayer 2012; Haavisto & Kovacs 2013). Thus, humanitarian development without being sustainable cannot be true human development (Neumayer 2012), since sustainable development is defined by the United Nations as “meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (WCED 1987).

The work of the humanitarian NGOs has changed with the entry of digital technologies and social media, as it has provided new means of communication, conveyance, collaboration, and cultivation amongst interconnected networks of people, communities, and organizations (Caliandro 2018). Studies have explored how humanitarian NGOs utilize social media platforms as an instrument to provide knowledge, to engage people to act in situations of crisis (Amstrong & Butcher 2017; Wukich & Khemka 2017). Dereli et al (2019) analyze how The International Federation of Red Cross uses Twitter and which topics they focus on. They use quantitative methods, such as word labeling, topic models, and sentiment analysis based on machine learning classification algorithms, which we are inspired by, when exploring the communication and interrelations between the Danish humanitarian NGOs in the context of Covid-19.

# 4 Overall method-plan (24)
In this paper we have an inductive and exploratory approach to generating understandings from data analysis. Hence, we start with a problem description that is aiming at the social processes and social structures of the humanitarian NGOs communication on social media throughout the global pandemic crisis of Covid-19. Our research and analysis approach can be labeled as symphonic social science, in terms of our data, methods, and theoretical interpretations (Halford & Savage 2017). We work with multiple empirical data sources, both deep and wide. This means that our data collection and analysis take place as a simultaneous action, thus making the sampling process theoretically saturated and critically assessed (Carlsen & Ralund 2017; Halford & Savage 2017). Furthermore, we will be moving between qualitative and quantitative analysis, by combining the method of netnography with the tools of social network analysis and content- and natural language processing analysis (Munk 2019).

## 4.1 Sampling strategy (13)
We have collected two types of data. First, we have collected substantial observations in an online version of ethnographic fieldnotes, also termed netnography, in  an immersion journal, cf. Kozinets. The immersion journal contains recordings and reflections about the field and the actors (Kozinets 2019: 283ff) and is collected across social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and LinkedIn, along with the organizations’ webpages. Second, we have collected a Twitter dataset with 12,139 observations containing the full population of tweets from the 30 identified actors in the period from 1st of January 2020 to 26th May 2021. This period was chosen since the Covid-19 virus was detected on 31 December 2019 and we argue that the content on social media would be seen in the light of Covid-19 starting here after (WHO 2021). The scraping is completed through Tweepy and the official twitter API. As we are only interested in the text data we removed emojis, URL’s, @mentions, special characters, numbers and hashtags, including lowercasing the text. After, we used the fasttext language detector only keeping Danish tweets (notably, the retweet networks presented later contain all tweets across languages). Fourth, we used the Danish lemmatizer Lemmy and removed stop words from the NLTK library including 41 self-identified stop words (App. 1).

Both datasets contain data on the same 30 NGOs, though only 27 of the NGOs are represented in the Twitter dataset due to no Twitter activity in the period for 3 of the NGOs. The NGOs are identified through a snowball sampling. The sampling started from the Danish fundraising Danmarks Indsamlingen, which is a yearly TV show collecting money for supporting 12 Danish humanitarian NGOs. Starting from looking at these 12 NGOs' cooperation and social media activity including following @mentions, retweets, comments and their use of hashtags, we have in an iterative process identified further 18 active NGOs. The strategy can be criticized as applying selection bias towards the sampling. However, looking at fig. 1, it can be argued that the original 12 NGOs cover different aspects of the humanitarian support field making it likely to discover new NGOs in different areas of the field.

**Fig. 1. Field areas of NGOs in Danmarks Indsamlingen**

Lastly, it should be noted that the 30 NGOs are not the exhaustive population of humanitarian NGOs in Denmark. Though we have tried to identify the field, we risk excluding the smaller and area-focused NGOs as these will not interact with the main field. Table 1 presents all the actors.
Table 1. 

## 4.2 Ethical considerations (29)
Throughout this paper, we have made several ethical considerations that we will present in this section. We chose to only focus on the NGOs’ social media profiles which is why we have anonymized the observations in our immersion journal, not mentioning any personal information. When scraping, we did in some cases include personal profiles, e.g., when scraping retweets, however, these are not included in the paper in a personal identifiable manner in relation to GDPR (Hoofnagle et al. 2019). We argue that the social media profiles belonging to the NGOs are publicly available since we can gain access to their posts without login in. Further, we also assume that the NGOs have published their content to be viewed and accessed publicly, making it ethically acceptable to scrape and note down their social media content. However, in some tweets, the NGOs also share personal stories including both personal and sensitive data. We assume that the NGOs are not sharing content without consent from the individuals. As this paper is conducted for research purposes, we find it ethically acceptable for us to include these types of posts in our data since we do not present the data in text, it is solely used as qualitative knowledge and as input data for our computational methods.

# 5 Netnography and qualitative analysis (24)
For this paper we will be using the netnographic framework of Kozinets to gain deep and valuable insights into what the humanitarian organizations communicate about and how they interrelate (Kozinets 2019). Kozinets describes netnography as the synergy between the internet and ethnography. He includes several different procedural steps in his framework that we use as an inspiration and guideline for our netnographic approach. For this section, we will go through the relevant steps for this paper.

## 5.1 Method (13)
Our first step, called initiation, consisted of laying out our research focus, of humanitarian communication during a worldwide pandemic (Kozinets 2019: Ch. 5). The second netnographic step was to investigate data sites to find information about our focus, leading us to Danmarks Indsamlingen’s website, where we found the 12 initial NGOs. We immersed ourselves into the field of humanitarian NGOs by observing their communication, though we did not interact directly with the field by commenting, liking or posting with the purpose of not inferring ourselves in the communication (ibid). We started searching for the 12 NGOs at the most popular social media sites (Kozinets 2019: Ch. 8). Most of the NGOs have accounts on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and LinkedIn. Consequently, these platforms became our starting point for scouting for relevant knowledge and more humanitarian NGOs (ibid). Through this process we ended up with 30 NGOs. The observations that were made in the searching and scouting process were saved and recorded in an immersion journal that is located on a One Drive provided by University of Copenhagen to ensure the security of our data (ibid) (App. 2). We chose to record our observations using an Excel file with a separate sheet for each NGO, a list of collaborations between NGOs and a sheet for other relevant observations. The fig. 2 shows the categories of observation.

**Fig. 2. Immersion journal categories**

 
We noted down general descriptions of our observations, the actual observations and additional information relevant for decoding and translating some of the findings (Kozinets 2019: Ch. 5). Further, we made room for reflection and analytical ideas though we did not go as much in detail as Kozinets suggests (Kozinets 2019: Ch. 10).

## 5.2 Analysis (29)
We prepared for analysis by collating, gathering and preparing our data (Kozinets 2019: Ch. 12). We began with an inductive coding process, where each researcher open coded a sub-set from the Twitter dataset and the immersion journal (261 tweets in total) (ibid). Each pool had an overlap, to ensure that all data were coded by two different researchers, creating intercoder reliability. Next, we combined our inductive codes in each dataset separately into pattern codes, by looking at similarities, patterns, and code combinations to be able to discover conceptual codes that can be used to answer our research question (ibid). We ended up with 22 different pattern codes for the subset of tweets, presented in fig. 3, and 10 different pattern codes in the immersion journal visualized in fig. 4.

**Fig. 3. Pattern codes from Tweets**

**Fig. 4. Pattern codes from Immersion Journal**

We see in the pattern codes that a lot of the content and observations are dominated by the following codes: Børn (children), Menneskerettigheder (human rights), Covid-19, support (emergency aid), socially vulnerable (and refugees), klima (climate), Conflict, and Politics. Interestingly, the pattern code Conflict emerged from our immersion journal but not from our tweets. This might be because our immersion journal includes observations across different social media platforms and as the noted observations are already subjectively processed by the researcher. Further, we see a larger number of emotional and activist stories being posted on Facebook, while the content on Twitter has a broader focus on politics opposed to Facebook (including Instagram and LinkedIn). We especially see this in the NGOs use of hashtags like #dkpol, #dkmedia, and #dkaid. This can be explained by Twitter often being used to communicate about politics, in a Danish context (Breslin et. al 2019). To further explore these pattern codes, we went through our data and qualitatively assessed which of the NGOs are focusing their communication on the different conceptual pattern codes. This qualitative assessment is visualized in fig. 5, where we have created an analogue positional map of how the NGOs are thematically clustered around the codes (Campagnolo 2020).

**Fig. 5. Analogue positional map**

This positional map shows us that some of the NGOs have a broad selection of focuses that they communicate about, such as Røde Kors who are communicating about children, Covid-19, conflicts, socially vulnerable, and support. On the other hand, we also see NGOs having a narrower focus in their communication, such as Repatriate the Children who talk about children and politics. What is also interesting is that not all NGOs communicate about Covid-19. It is mostly communicated about from NGOs that have a broad focus.

Through our immersion journal, we found that the NGOs make collaborations communicated on the different social media platforms. These collaborations can be understood as interrelations on social media platforms. Here collaboration contains shared statements amongst multiple NGOs, shared campaigns, events and demonstrations hosted by multiple NGOs and shared calls for legal action (App. 3). We traced these collaborations on all four social media platforms, amongst all 30 NGOs during our studied time period. We chose to visualize these collaborations in a visual network analysis (VNA) by using the computational program Gephi and the algorithm Force Atlas 2 (Decuypere 2020). The node size is based on in-degree. The blue nodes represent the initial 12 NGOs and the green nodes represent the NGOs that were further discovered through our netnography. The edges represent collaborations between the NGOs and are weighted, so thicker edges represent multiple collaborations. Further, the direction of the edges is presented clockwise, for example, Røde Kors has posted about collaborating with Blå Kors on LinkedIn, but there is not a collaboration posted from Blå Kors to Røde Kors. Lastly, the edges are colored based on what social media platform the collaboration was recorded from. The VNA is presented in fig. 6.

**Fig. 6. VNA**

The VNA shows that the collaborations are posted on Twitter more than 50% of the time, but that collaborations posted on Instagram are posted multiple times, hence the thick edges. Further we see that there is a region of NGOs that are central to the network, consisting of Red Barnet, Care Danmark and Mellemfolkeligt Samvirke (Decuypere 2020). Interestingly, we find that the 12 initial NGOs are more central in the network, while the NGOs discovered later are less central (App. 4). This indicates that the initial NGOs either have more important roles in the field or a screwed sampling. Multiple of the less central actors are smaller NGOs based on their number of followers, e.g Sæt dem Fri, and Blå Kors, however, we also see larger NGOs in the periphery as UNDP Denmark, but these are instead represented by smaller nodes due to a more international focus, whereas they do not collaborate a lot with the field.

## 5.3 Discussion (24)
Netnography helps to create deep data about our chosen subject, contributing to a deeper understanding of the NGO’s dominant focuses and interrelations on social media platforms (Kozinets 2019: Ch. 5).  Kozinets presents a number of steps for doing netnography, but this rigid approach might be constraining to some degree when setting up an explorative research design (Kozinets 2019). Nevertheless, the netnographic method is a good supplement to the more quantitative analysis presented later in this paper, and can help us interpret some of the findings from those analyses. Though it is important to mention, when we qualitatively assess what we find important to record in the immersion journal, we inevitably introduce a human bias and subjectivity which creates for a low reliability since other researchers might focus on other observations. The same goes for our Twitter dataset as social media is changing all the time and posts might be deleted. Therefore it is important to note that this is a subjective still shot of how we interpret the situation at the time we collected our data, based on the sample of NGOs that we encountered. Further the subset of tweets might not be generalizable for our entire Twitter dataset either, since we only look at 261 tweets (including tweets from all NGOs) out of a total of 9,449 tweets and therefore might only capture specific parts of the communication that the NGOs engage in on Twitter. Related to this, the twitter activity varies across the organization, whereas some actors and their agendas are more prominent in part of the results (table 1). 








